# Introduction

According to MIT Climate Portal, the urban heat island effect is a phenomenon whereby cities experience higher air temperatures than the surrounding countryside. Scientists refer to areas afflicted by these higher temperatures as urban heat islands, and people living in these areas are particularly exposed to the effects of climate change. People living in urban heat islands are especially vulnerable to the effects of climate change. As the planet warms, urban heat islands will only intensify those higher temperatures.(https://climate.mit.edu/explainers/urban-heat-islands).

In general, certain social groups are particularly vulnerable to crises, including climate change. These vulnerable people are **children**, persons with disabilities, ethnic minorities, **migrant workers**, **displaced persons**, **older people**, and other socially marginalized groups. (https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/social-dimensions-of-climate-change#1).

If we focus our attention on migrants (and in particular refugees) and displaced people, the UNHCR (UN Refugee Agency) states that the vast majority of refugees (approximately 78 percent) do not live in camps but in cities, and are therefore more vulnerable to the extreme heatwaves caused by climate change. In general urban locations offer more opportunities to live autonomously and find employment, but they also pose major challenges as refugees are often forced to share accommodation or live in non-functional public buildings, collective centers, slums or other types of informal settlements with substandard living conditions. (https://action.unrefugees.org/refugee-facts/camps/)

# Project Description

The aim of this project is developing an **SMS-heat-alert** and **health-check system** that **forcibly displaced population** (including internally dispaced people, refugees, asylum-seekers and other people in need of international protection that settled in **urban locations** in **developing countries** of asylum affected by **extreme heat conditions**) could benefit from by receving heat alerts in case of extreme weather conditions together with multilingual advice on practices to avoid heat-realted diseases. Moreover, they could communicate any heat-related symptoms they might experience through a multilingual SMS-form. The system would be integrated with **help-centers** in the cities of reference where vulnerable people from different nationalities give multilingual support to those in need thus making the project sustainable in the long-term.



THe UNHCR provides a database with the demographics of forcibly displaced population including internally dispaced people, refugees, asylum-seekers and other people in need of international protection that settled in urban locations in the countries of asylum. Since there is no universal definition of urban, UNCHR classifies an urban location as a settlement with more than 5,000 inhabitants.(2021, 2022 Data: https://www.unhcr.org/refugee-statistics/download/?url=0quh0N)
